I went to a place in Monaco where they give you a day's instruction. That's not nearly enough.
Not enough, but I got a rough idea if I worked and I tried to write on it and I thought I was writing badly because
There was no sense of muscular effort, and that applies also to using an electric car, right?
I like to feel that I'm... It's rather like playing the piano.
I like to feel your muscles going into it.
And I just was not writing well.
There was no sensation of creating anything.
And I noticed that with one or two writers, their style has deteriorated.
Albin Tochter wrote a recent book, wrote a third wave.
He said in the middle, I have now started writing this on a word post.
And you can see the drop in the quality inside.
Come on, it's black.
It's black.
You know george lex 10th novel george mills might scan the opens. Well I know he's not the only one. I mean uh our writer uh Len Deighton you know when his last book was called Goodbye, Mickey Mouse. He's a popular writer. He's been using one of these for a long time and uh he admits to me that there's certain
Lack of tension.
You know, it's as though you're leaving it to the machine and your brain sort of turns off.
Your brain's there, you know.
I think it's marvellous revision.
Yes, I'm a bad reviser because I waste a lot of paper.
When I write a novel, I... You're leaving a lot of varying... Well, you know what happens, you sit down, you put the paper in the machine and say, right, I've got to start writing a novel.
So you type one.
That's all right.
One at the top right hand corner, you're all right, you're written.
Then you put chapter one, or just O-N-E, underlined.
And then you attempt a sentence, and this is bad.
tear it up, start again, and eventually you get a first sentence, then you get on to a second sentence, and that's no good.
You know, this takes about, I waste about 20 or more sheets in just trying to get a first page.
All the time we've got a first page, I tend to say, you know, that's it.
Nobody else wants to touch that.
That's as good as I can make it.
I'm just going to test and see how we're doing.
That's fine.
I think it's a different matter with journalism.
I think that writing an article, you don't worry quite as much about qualities of style or accuracy, as you should.
Well, the deadlines.
The deadlines, the deadlines are important.
I'm very fond of deadlines.
I love deadlines.
I get these quite a lot in in Europe you know. I bought certainly two newspapers. One is the Daily Mail in London. The other is uh the Corriere della Sera in Milan, and they
When some event takes place, like, you know, the attempted assassination of the Pope, you see, they write, well, you want 2,000 words in one hour.
I love that.
I myself wonder.
I know that I can't spare the time to write too well.
You know, you can't search for it.
That's an interesting statement.
Well, surely.
It makes the style flow.
The style is highly colloquial.
When you read it, you're horrified.
That's what's horrified to read it.
There was a piece you had in the New York Times, I think, in the last summer, in the living section on food.
Oh, yes.
Oh, I clipped it.
I used to be a restaurant reviewer.
I do this occasionally.
When do you know all about it?
Well, I'm a cook.
I do the cooking.
I do the cooking at home.
And my son is a restaurant cook.
Oh, I do.
He's in here.
I trained by the French.
I was a worker.
But...
Where does he work?
Well, he worked at perhaps the best restaurant in the world, which is Phuket, you know, on the Champs-Élysées in Paris.
They call it a brigade, you know, a brigade in the picture.
There was a brigade of 50, or probably more, probably more than 50, and it becomes very personal.
And you have this autocratic chef, you know, the autocratic man who never does any cooking, he just sits in an office like a chef, a real chef.
You become part of a machine.
But he got a job in a bistro on... Ah, thank you.
In Paris.
He was his own boss in the kitchen.
He took over the kitchen.
Thank you very much.
He was all right at the time.
Where would you like to put that?
Oh, that's the one.
You know what?
I'm going to get in.
Where should we put it?
Oh, here as well.
Yeah, that's my shirt eggs.
Are those your shirt eggs?
Oh, thank you.
Well, that's your what?
That's right, your blueberry muffin.
Your blueberry muffin, that's right.
None of those.
I'll leave too early tomorrow to get anywhere.
The last job my son had was in the Grosvenor Hotel in London, which was a good hotel, a big hotel, but it was all banquets, you know, there was a banquet every day, a thousand people or two thousand, and all he was doing was
cutting cucumbers.
They gave it up.
Well, you have to learn, I guess, there's an apprenticeship in every profession.
It's a long apprenticeship in, you know, in America, well, you just go into a hash joint, I suppose, and fry eggs, but with a French, it's a very serious business.
Very serious.
The whole scope of that piece was how the same dishes
But with the French name, they sound so different.
They sound different, yes.
But there's a lot of snobbishness, if I may say, in America.
There's a lot of snobbishness in America about French food.
You know what I mean?
Faculty wives pride themselves on their gourmet cooking.
Instead of turning out very good.
American dishes.
They give you invitation.
There is fashion and food every day.
There's some very good New England dishes, like New England boiled dinner, which everyone is supposed to despise.
Have you ever tried it?
I love it.
and um there's a lot of things in Boston that's strong really it's just a young or quite clam chowder clenched up make clam chowder. Boston cream pie. Baked thinning patty. Have you ever had that?
Is that Scottish? I've done the cooking in the house now for the last 15 years into my second marriage.
Because my wife is very badly brought up by her mother.
She has no domestic school.
She'll be starving.
Tell me about...
the distinction between an entertainment and a novel. Are we to take an entertainment not as seriously as a novel, or? You're not to take it seriously at all. Your attitude should be one of total relaxation, and then if there's anything in the novel that should work on the subliminal level. Would you call this an experiment, or?
It is in the sense that it's an attempt to allow a visual medium to influence a verbal medium.
It's an attempt to imitate television, to imitate the process of watching television.
In one of two ways.
Either you're watching three screens at the same time, which I think will come.
I think it's going to happen.
I think we've got more information than from getting a single screen.
Do you think the powers of concentration of people are... My feeling is that they're declining, not getting... Well, they're taking in a lot of visual material.
I mean, if you consider the, you know, the Oscar Awards last night, there comes a moment when you've got to take in six or seven faces, in sets,
you know, round probably two images, one on top of the other.
People would take that in all right.
But I was thinking rather of, when you're watching television late at night, there are more commercials than earlier.
and uh you have to keep switching from one channel to another. You have to you know, just that switcher as a matter of fact that is what that novel is. So when they when the commercial will come out on one thing you go to another. You won't become adamant following three or even more uh storylines in the same time that's what it was. I have a daughter, 18 months old, and she destroyed my switcher
Which is good.
Well, what happens now?
Well, I read the book, which I have to do anyway.
But it doesn't bother me.
As a matter of fact, I can leave the TV on in the background.
Maybe it's part of my training as a newspaper man.
I can't work without knowledge.
You can't write if you're listening to music.
Well, the rhythm's getting in the way.
That's very interesting, but you're a musician.
Well, it's true, but I can't do it.
You know, it's very tempting to tell somebody to start writing, but the rhythm could get in the way.
In a newspaper newsroom, for instance, there are certain sounds which are normal.
I know.
I know them, yes.
I've worked on a newspaper myself.
If anything improves that is not part of the normal, if some workmen are in there, it will destroy and you'll scream. I mean you'll throw things, but all the other noises yelling for coffee the machines clacking away the bells and all these other things, there is a rhythm to that which is actually soothing. There's also a limit to what you can take in. I'm living in Monaco and during the winter it's not too bad
But round about now, the noise starts on a quite remarkable scale.
We start off with a Grand Prix, and the noise of the Grand Prix surrounds us.
It's quite incredible.
And then summer comes, and the tourists come, and there's 24-hour,
24-hour traffic.
24-hour, because I'm living on the main road between East and Italy.
And 24 hours, I can't stand it.
I've got to leave.
I've reached the limit of toleration.
But the ordinary noise of the house, I like it.
Telephones, people shout.
My wife's Italian, so it's a lot of shows.
My premier literary obsession is studying Shakespeare, for me.
And I have an enormous library.
you know maybe four or five hundred volumes. On Shakespere? Just on Shakespeare, and I've read all of your Shakespeare. I haven't written much. But well you've written, you've got a respectable shelf
And you wouldn't mind if I ask you a few questions.
Please, please do, yeah.
Couldn't please me better.
I have, in fact, used your suggestion that the 46th Psalm was written by Shakespeare, this 46th year with the 46th word from the beginning and the 46th word from King King as his signature.
That's right.
Well, I made a story out of that.
And I read that particular story.
That was published by Delaware Press, I think.
Oh, that's where you found it.
I see.
Interesting.
I wrote that story for an American homosexual living in Verona who bought a fine old hand press, an American hand press, and produces, or was producing, remarkable hand-printed books.
bound in leather, which is sold on subscription for $5,000 each, limiting the number, probably so about 80.
And I did this beautifully done.
He printed it beautifully.
I called it Will and Testament Day.
Exactly. It's not being produced in England. It's just coming out of... It's fairly accurate. I think that um they discovered I think a man called Martin Seymour Smith in Britain discovered certain letters which seemed to prove that Ben Jonson had been involved in the Katesby Conspiracy on the inside
and pretended to become a Catholic and then renounced it all when the conspirators were caught and drank off the communion cup in the Church of England in token of his belief.
I don't see what else you can say.
That 46th Psalm business is... It's a wonderful... It can't be an accident.
And the poetry is beautiful, too.
Yes, but can you see how it connects?
No.
Especially where you point out what the earlier words were.
They weren't shaked and they weren't speared.
They weren't.
They were rattle or something.
That's right, yeah.
Well, I've just been translating that particular story into French, and I was watching imagine the difference, isn't it?
But that meant looking at the French version.
Which is quite remote, quite remote.
But the irony of the thing is, if it's ironic, is that he's a man who didn't even care whether he published his own plays in his lifetime.
Well, that's remarkable.
That's quite astonishing.
I did an interview last summer with Robert Giroux, the London publisher, and I will ask you the same question I asked him.
But I'll tell you what, I asked him what he answered.
I said, if you were able to summon forth Shakespeare and leave Crossroads on and bring him forward for an hour, what would you ask him?
What would you like to know?
He said, oh boy, what a question.
That is an hour.
He said, well, I would like to know, because I'm a publisher.
Why the hell didn't he ever want to publish his own works?
He said, Dad, I'd like to know.
He must have known that he was wonderful.
I don't think, I have a feeling that he'd never answer any literary questions at all.
If he said...
What's the fluctuation like in the price of land in the factory area?
It gives you probably a long learning discussion of how it had changed since 1564, you know, when it went up by one shilling in 1957, you know, etc.
I honestly don't think he'd answer any literary questions.
There's no doubt he had, though, strong artistic impulses, and what an artist, what a conscious artist.
I don't think he really gave a damn about discussions.
Except from the viewpoint of a practical dramaturgy, you know, the immediate problem of putting a thing on.
And I often feel that, you know, with Hamlet, there must have been a hell of a row between him and Dick Berkey, who, I'll tell you what, the producer who produced these things, over Troilus and Gressler, where he only had one performance.
And, you know, if you read the quarto, it says, this was never clapper-clawed by the multitude.
You know, nobody likes it, I think, in other words.
I don't think it holds up as a play, though, do you?
Well, it's a remarkable poem, you know.
As a play, I don't know.
It depends how it's produced.
But I feel sure that there was a lot of stuff.
he wrote for a transgressor, which was cut.
Verbage insisted it be cut.
Thank you.
And Shakespeare said that he's not going to get away with that.
I'm going to put that back in the next play.
And when it came to Hamlet, I put it all back in again.
You know, we had this long, long visit with Hecuba.
Beautiful, but quite irrelevant.
And Shakespeare, the
The cunning artist, you know, makes it relevant by having Hamlet to speak, you know, about what's Hecuba to him, or, you know, you could cut that out, and not that anybody would want to.
I think no difference.
Well, as George had said, would he have wanted a thousand luck?
Would he have wanted a thousand?
Yeah.
Yes, that's right.
Sufflaminandles, yes.
Sufflaminandles.
How would you think?
What would you ask him about?
What would you like to know?
I know it's a damn silly question.
I'd like to know about the dark lady.
Who was the dark lady and how dark was she?
You'd get right to it.
Would you be interested in the second best beds?
No, I think I can explain that.
I don't think there's really any need to ask a question, because if Susanna took over the best bedroom, which she would have to, Anne, as the dowager,
could automatically take the second best bed.
It's a matter of the call of heaven.
In any case, the second best bed must have been the bed they had when they were married.
It wasn't necessarily a nasty slap at her, the second best bed.
But she was entitled to that anyway.
Your questions wouldn't be then literary or creative.
God, I'm absolutely convinced he would give you no answer.
You try, however, I'm sure.
I don't think I could.
What do you mean by this line, Master Shakespeare?
I don't know.
I'm sure.
Well, I think this... What I would be most interested in, thankfully, would be listening to his voice.
People tend to forget that Shakespeare had a voice.
Shakespeare himself was an actor.
I'd like to know how good an actor he was, how he used his voice.
And to check whether my own, well, not my own, but linguistic suppositions as to how he spoke are correct.
I think they probably are.
I can give you a fairly good imitation of Shakespeare's voice myself.
Oh, please.
Oh, really?
Well, you know, Shakespeare played... All right, then.
Well, Hamlet, anyway.
To be or not to be, that is the question.
Whether it is nobler in the mind to suffer with slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, or to take arms against a sea of troubles and by opposing end.
It's closer to New England than to New England.
And they spoke very rapidly.
Very rapidly.
So when you said the two-hour traffic of this stage, it takes us three and a half to four hours to do a thorough Hamlet...
I directed it myself once.
It took two nights.
It took two hours per night.
Four hours per night.
But... English was spoken rapidly on the stage until these Victorians like Henry Irving began to slow it down.
It was partly because of the size of the theatres in London.
The Theatre Regulating Act...
a limited serious drama to two theatres.
These were the Theatre Royal at Glory Lane and the one at Covent Garden.
They were very big, they were very big theatres.
And so they had to develop a technique whereby every word was clear of the bag.
This meant speaking very slowly.
And the technique went on into Victorian times with Henry Irving and Beardbone Tree, you know, to be or not to be, you know, that sort of thing.
Then the man who changed all was Harley Grandel Barker.
He suddenly said, back to rapidity of speech, and they said, well, supposing we can't understand this, but that's not the point.
That's not the point at all.
There's a lot of Shakespeare you can't understand, unless you look at it, look at the text.
But he said, the speed, the speed, and he was right.
I don't know whether America's really picked up that point, but the Royal Shakespeare company picked it up.
And I'm pretty sure that Shakespeare spoke rapidly, rather like an Italian, not like an American.
Americans speak slowly.
I don't know where they get this from.
Do you think he was a good actor?
No, I don't either.
A louty actor, probably.
But he was listed, of course.
He had quite a place in it.
Well, he's got his mind, I think, probably.
He played the ghost in Hamlet, the ghost.
Yeah, that's what I think they say.
He played in Ben Jonson's Janus, or part of that, I don't know.
And he played in Every Man in His Humor.
Um, I think he was probably a good middle, he would never win an Oscar, not like Ben Kingsley, but, you know, couldn't be bothered to learn the line.
How about visualizing real people like this, in terms of having fictional work as you can, or even in more contemporary type people, Freudian class people?
What kind of problems do you face with this?
Well, you've got to pretend there are no problems, otherwise you'd never do it right.
You've got to make a very bold step, take a very bold step.
Is it making a new character, or do you try a new character?
Well, I think most of the characters become one's self, in the sense that you're approaching them to be inside, which means it's your inside.
But what worries me very frequently is the speech rhythms they use.
The idiom is that they tend to be my own.
That's what worries me.
I end up with a bunch of characters who are a bit too like me to be as if acceptable.
But I think that's fairly common.
I think the scenes with Freud and his wife are priceless.
I don't know whether it happened or not.
I don't know.
I just don't know.
I wish he's trying to shut him up when he says a couple of times.
What do you mean about sex?
Oh, no.
What do you mean about probably too?
Do you think of anything except sex?
No.
I mean, about probably too.
And then he brings in the Oedipus.
That's right.
You've translated that.
That's my translation, that's my translation.
Is this a matter of employing material that you're... To give the critics notice, they never do.
No, but it's easy, obviously, to use your... As you get older, you know, you have a hell of a lot of stuff behind you, and why not utilize something to do?
I do a lot of this cheating, but you as a journalist will understand this.
When somebody dies...
let me ask you that i'm asked for a quick victory. Let's see if i've written anything in the past. Sure well the clips we call it in our business we say pull the clips. That's right pretend i'm writing it for the first time nobody knows nobody interesting about Shakespear. Are you um
Have you studied this question of Shakespeare's speech, the way they actually spoke English?
I'm sorry, sir.
Have you studied the way that they actually spoke?
I haven't, I'm sure there is a... But there's a kind of, on the part of a lot of American actors, there's a sort of false reverence, you know, for people like Olivia and John Gilbert, whereas American speech, especially in this area, would...
come far closer to what shape we're actually used.
The origin of the local streets of Plymouth is pretty far west, but close enough to Stratford.
I have read that as a matter of fact.
There is a book that came out from Oxford about two years ag, very forbidding intimidating. Well it can be, but it's got to be approached much more humanly, but it's a combination of Dublin, Dublin speech and
You know, if one goes to Dublin, you'll hear the same vowel sounds.
Irish speech is much more conservative than British.
American speech as conservative, but British is not.
It's strange, I don't know why.
I don't know why.
I mean, the British are conservative.
Conservative people, the Americans are not.
I don't think so.
Well, Americans are very progressive.
I don't know.
I think we tend to be very conservative at our level.
We seem to have demonstrated this several times in the last few months.
No, you make things.
The new things come from America, don't they?
The new thing.
We're always the West for new things.
And we get them.
I don't mean new technology, but new philosophers.
The new philosophers come with you.
You know, this is ridiculous, I must have some time.
If you want more coffee, if you do... How about the exercise in writing science fiction?
Oh, that's not science fiction, but... It's a very loose term.
The whole point about that segment, it's not science fiction.
It's about people, it's not about machines.
It's about people.
Is that what science fiction is, though?
It's about machines?
It's very rarely about people.
But what I wanted to do, I could do it, I didn't have the skill,
write in the manner of Henry James, you see, about people facing, you know, the final catechism.
Of course, if you did write in the style of Henry James, the final catechism would disappear entirely.
It would become irrelevant.
Which it is, in a sense.
It's not, you know, the end of the world is not very interesting, is it?
Well, he doesn't really believe in it.
He doesn't really believe in it.
I don't believe in it either.
No do I, I don't read it.
I find most of it very, very dull.
Very dull written.
Well, because it lacks character.
I think it's it.
The best one is still, well, the best.
Could I have some more tea, please?
Could I have some strong tea?
I mean, Boston usually has the best tea in the world.
All you give me is one tea bag.
I'll tell you, we're going to take care of you.
That's right.
You got the wrong weight.
I'm not a weight.
I'm sorry.
I know that.
I'd like some more glasses.
Thank you very much.
H.G.
Wells is still the best, you know, I think because, you know, the War of the Worlds is good, totally typical, but what is interesting in that book is people, especially, there's one old man in the book who says, you know, right, they're going to destroy the world, and
Things will never be as they were before.
I remember you could buy tinned salmon once, you know, and eat it with vinegar.
That's it.
The taste buds.
Do you ever have a comment in there that, in a way, how Paradise Lost could be seen as a form of science fiction?
I'm sure that... He attempts a definition of science fiction.
I don't think it's right.
I think it begins with Daniel Defoe.
I believe that.
It begins with Daniel Defoe's, God bless you, sir.
Just you will make up for the last one.
You're very kind.
Thank you.
The Journal of the Plague Year.
By Daniel Defoe.
Which I haven't read, I need to say.
No, there's no need to.
Well, you'd like it anyway.
You know, pick it up.
You'll like it.
It's science fiction in that.
It's about an event which nobody's prepared for, which obviously requires a scientific response.
It doesn't get it.
People are not capable of coping with the organic matter.
You don't know what it is.
You don't know how to cure it.
And what happens to a whole city, a whole vast group of people, how they respond to it?
And the remarkable thing about the book is that you think that it's a journalistic record, and you suddenly realise that Defoe was born in 1660, was only, what, five, when the Great Plague happened.
And it's a cunning journalistic job, you know, he's read the document, pretended he was there,
and dished it up in a very unflowery style.
You can hear the rattle the tide by the way.
A fast job.
A fast job, without chapter division.
No chapter division, no time for that.
Straight on playing the way.
80 pages and it's a great man. Well it feels genuine. It feels real genuine. Your book, I we actually see the switches, I mean, you don't you don't announce that we're going from from the the problem of links before and then on to trotsky. We just we just move immediately immediately we switch. Occasionally there's a link
what the television used to call blue.
It's very, very occasional.
But it looks very arbitrary.
In a sense it is arbitrary.
But if you look more closely you'll find you have the three major narrative forms.
You have the Broadway musical which is a major narrative form.
You have the television serial and you have the novels.
You have three
three events which seem to me to be possibly the most important event.
The American discovery of the possibility of living in space, the unconscious, which is the same as space, and the possibility of creating a world of social society
which is so impossible.
It goes a bit deeper.
That's a wonderful... True.
I love the fact that you wrote your own dust jacket for it.
Well, that again is probably a trick, but when the book came out, something railing about
some of the dust jacket verbs that you need. It's very embarrassing. Either the person who has written or hasn't read the book or has read it and has decided to give you everything that happens. Sometimes if you're reviewing it won't be very grateful. If you're pressed and the deadline is on on you and you need something but I know immediately. When my reviewers have about 80 people who review for me
How many books do you review?
You do all the books you're doing, do you?
No, I have a page every Sunday for which I assign three-way.
We've already reviewed your book on my Sunday page.
Oh, God bless you, sir.
God bless you.
It may sell two or three copies, you know.
There's a fellow who reviewed it did a wonderful job.
I gave it a nice two-way, tiny three-way novel.
There's a lot of two-way tugging.
Well, no, the other thing, I'm very grateful, really.
Sincerely.
And then my piece will run next week in the evening paper.
Really good.
But we do about ten books a week anyway.
It's a lot.
Well, I know what life was like.
When I came back from Malaya with a death sentence, I'd been given a year to live, but this was commuted to life.
I saw life.
I had a difficult job of earning a living as a writer during that terminal year, pseudo-terminal year, and I wrote five and a half novels.
The following year... In that one year, five and a half novels?
Well, it is possible.
I mean, indeed, I ended up by writing... What year was it?
1959.
I ended up writing my 2,000 daily words before breakfast, up the day to myself, which is possible if you don't write too carefully.
Nobody cares.
No, the point I was going to make was this, that I got my first journalistic, my, yes, my first posthumous journalistic job with the Yorkshire Post, which is a paper you won't know.
It's a very old British paper.
It's published in Leeds in Yorkshire.
It's hard-headed, you know, in Yorkshire.
And they gave me the job of reviewing all the fiction.
And I had no idea at the time what this entailed.
I had no idea how much fiction I published.
They paid me six pounds, which was what, about ten dollars?
Ten dollars an hour to live on that.
They got all the books.
All of them.
And it is quite incredible.
You're going to see my library after five years.
Well, you sell them.
You sell them.
I keep what I... Well, you keep selling them.
Well, I don't sell them.
I'll be honest with you.
I get my access to the public library.
Well, you're a gentleman, but... I was a bit... I'm also careful.
Well, I was a bit worried.
I was a bit worried about money then.
And every other Monday, I used to fill two suitcases with books.
And the village where I was living inside... All was said the same thing.
And there were all persuasions.
Well, indeed.
I realize that now.
Like a bloody fool.
I was given a lot of persuasion for money.
Like an idiot.
I used to go to the States.
They always said to me, he's leaving his wife again.
I had no memory of it.
I'd take them to Charling Cross Station in London and get off on the Strand and walk up the Strand of Feet Street, where the only Jewish bookseller in London, I'm called Lewis Simmons, and he would buy these books half-bought.
It'd give you notes, banknotes, new, fresh banknotes, lovely, clean crevices, which were yours.
It was your money, my money.
You'd walk back to the station and buy a bottle of brandy on the way with choice cigars.
That was marvellous.
I've never had that since.
I meant for me, you said you were under a death sentence for a year.
Did you tell me what you mean by that?
Well, I was working in...
In Borneo, in the north, there are three terraces there.
Sarawak, British North Borneo, which has changed to Sabah.
It's called Sabah.
And in the middle, there's a little sultanate called Brunei.
Brunei is the Malay name for Borneo.
And this was run by sultan and family.
And they discovered oil.
They discovered oil.
A shell was there.
And I was teaching there, and it was a desperate and difficult place to live in.
There was a lot of underground political activities.
It was a dangerous place, and one day I became so bored to work everything that I just lay down on the floor of a classroom.
I must have been pretty ill to do that, I suppose, but I said, right, let somebody do something about it.
And they were very quick.
They got me on a stretcher and sent me onto a plane and sent me home and said I had a cerebral tuber.
I didn't believe it for one minute, but they said I had too much protein in the spinal fluid.
How you gauge the correct amount, I don't know.
It's not a regular test, is it?
You know, if you had a regular
drawing off like that.
So they said then that after all the tests they said that the tumor is inoperable.
We'll give you a year to live.
But I still think it was a put-up job.
I think it was something very fishy in it.
I mean, did they actually perceive a tumor, or they just assumed that one was there?
They assumed something on the strength of the protein.
But I believe it was a political work.
The British are quite cunning, as you know, and can be quite cunning.
They used to be quite cunning.
We'd had a visit from the Duke of Edinburgh, and my first wife is now dead.
Welsh, very fiery, and it was a garden party.
And the Duke said, you know, is everything all right here?
And he said, oh, yes, thank you, Your Highness.
And my wife said, no, everything is fucking terrible here.
He was very interested in this, you know, being a sailor, you know, he didn't find the language in this.
I spent three years at sea myself.
Well, you know what it's like.
He's rather a good man, you know.
Philip, he's a good man.
He's put up in a lot.
He's a good man.
He hates journalists, but he's a good man.
And we had the British resident, you know, and the High Commissioner frowning like hell.
And I think that they were determined to get us out, you see, under any pretext.
But you came home for moving that he wanted out here to live.
I hadn't been told.
My wife had been told.
But certainly something bothered you to write fresh and half knowledge.
What could you do?
This burst of energy must have come from somewhere.
Probably a cerebral tumour.
I don't know.
I was pretty convinced that it couldn't be so.
I didn't feel bad.
So I did what I had to do with this.
Yeah, I wrote...
I wrote.
I had no journalism.
I had no contact, but I wrote fiction.
The novels are still around.
I have to say that reading three different stories simultaneously is no problem for me, because I read about six books simultaneously anyway.
I have a program at night where I have a stack of four or five books that I'm working on, and I'll start off with something pleasant, and then I'll get on to something more slippery.
You take me to bed?
I take them to bed because we have a little battle.
I have a little light now that focuses.
That's right.
I have to say it.
I go to bed about nine.
I go to bed about midnight, but I'll play with the kids for an hour and a half or so when I get home.
I get two little girls.
I'll read for five hours or so.
That's right.
Over the course of leaving, I'll probably pay attention to
So this is no problem?
No, I'm sure it's not, but it's no problem for me.
But I was very glad when I got off reviewing fiction, I was reviewing fiction for various papers in Britain, but I was off it for a long time and as it were promoted, you know, to the writing of a solus, The Observer.
Did you ever see The Observer?
Very infrequently.
It's a good, it's a Sunday paper.
They gave me a book, you know, and I write 1,500 words on this one.
But Punch, you know Punch, you've got to ask me to start doing some fiction, and I'm a glutton for punishment to start doing fiction again.
I don't think I can do it much longer.
I'm cheating too much.
I'm not reading the whole book.
some books some novels I can't read I don't have to I think a professional critic I was on a board three years ago for the American Book Awards general non-fiction they sent me
187 books to judge and, you know, have four weeks to do it.
Well, it's impossible.
Not only is it... So do you feel a bit guilty at the end?
I didn't.
You can tell the quality.
The way I rationalize it is that I would pay attention to every book, which means I may read the first half of one, but you know instantly a book that has no merit.
Well, I mean, you know, I often feel that supposing you'd been given a copy of Ulysses in 1922, and, you know, like a fool, you'd never seen that album before.
I mean, there are such people, you know, audiences for Ulysses.
You're kidding me, right?
Well, you know, you open the page, you know, you open that episode where Blumen sees the cabman's shelter, you know, and it's written in this ghastly...
banal style.
Mr. Joyce writes in a very banal style.
Would you have said that, having encountered it for the first time, not having seen it?
I think you would have said, this is so banal, it's brilliant.
You would have recognized the brilliance.
The recognition of the reality is so deliberate that there's a superb lacrossement of that.
How was Ulysses recognized immediately?
Well, in Britain, of course, it was mostly ignored.
I mean, occasionally I look back at old volumes of TLS or Punshan, you know, whatever magazine is available.
You were looking to make sure the tape was ignored.
Yeah, quite right.
Either the thing was ignored or the thing was ignored.
dismissed in a few lines.
The real reviews came here, of course, came out of the state.
Well, the good review was by Edmund Wilson, isn't it?
I think Wilson's review of Ulysses and of Finnegan's Wake are still the best, still the best.
Strangely, it's still the best, despite the wealth of scholarships that come out.
But I was looking at a review of Philip Hitchcock done by one of our pundits, a man I do test, called Malcolm Muggeridge.
And I thought this was a totally evil review in that he said, I do not understand this book.
I do not see why he wrote it, etc.
And this was so much a non-review that I used.
I don't think that's commissable.
I mean, of course, Muglidge never realized.
The time would come when you'd have books called Joyce, The Critical Heritage, and these things would be printed.
There's a number of volumes of collections of critical... Okay, they just brought one out.
I'm doing one in the Mocop, which is very, very... Yes, I've seen the Mocop one.
He had some terrible reviews for Lolita in Britain, probably here too.
Some of them are showing up.
Have you read his lectures, which have been published?
I've just been, yes, I've reviewed them, I think, without accepting.
I've just been reviewing the new one, which I see in the bookshops.
How are you enjoying them?
Well, of course, I think we all...
What he had to say was... He didn't think much of it as a work of art.
No, he's right.
No, what he says is totally right.
He says that we all assume that Cervantes was a humanist who...